Improvements to Python | Casting (#464)
Codecademy/docs: content/python/concepts/casting/casting.md

  - 'Computer Science'
  - 'Data Science'
Tags:
  - 'Data Types'
  - 'Variables'
  - 'Variable Types'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-python-3'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

> Casting (also known as type conversion) is a process that converts a variable's data type into another data type. These conversions can be implicit (automatically interpreted) or explicit (using built-in functions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Casting, also known as type conversion, is a process that converts a variable's data type into another data type. These conversions can be implicit (automatically interpreted) or explicit (using built-in functions).
```

> Casting, also known as type conversion, is a process that converts a variable's data type into another data type. These conversions can be implicit (automatically interpreted) or explicit (using built-in functions).

Reviewer 2: I like this new-and-improved first sentence! Could we include this in the meta-`Description` above on line 3?

## Implicit Type Conversion

> Python's interpreter automatically type casts one data type into another data type. This type of conversion is done without any user involvement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Python's interpreter automatically performs type conversion without user involvement.
```

> To avoid data loss, Python converts smaller data types to higher data types. In the below example, the integer 7 is converted to a float when added with 2.2. Since the expression represents the sum of two `float` values, the data type of `y` is also `float`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Python avoids data loss by converting lower data types to higher data types. In the example below, the integer, 7, is converted to a float when added with another float, 2.2. .
```

> Python converts smaller data types to higher data types.

What do we mean here when referring to some Python data types as "smaller/lower" and others as "higher"?

Reviewer: @Dusch4593 to my understanding, a lower data type refers to one that allows for a smaller range of values whereas a high data type allows for more range. So, integers are constrained to represent whole numbers while floats can represent whole and decimal numbers.

> In order to avoid data loss, Python converts smaller data types to higher data types. In the below example, the integer 7 is converted to a float when added with 2.2. Since the expression represents the sum of two `float` values, the data type of `y` is also `float`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To avoid data loss, Python converts smaller data types to higher data types. In the below example, the integer 7 is converted to a float when added with 2.2. Since the expression represents the sum of two `float` values, the data type of `y` is also `float`.
```

> In order to avoid data loss, Python converts smaller data types to higher data types. In the below example, the integer `7` is type casted to a float when added with `2.2`. Since the expression represents the sum of two `float` values, the data type of `y` is also `float`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to avoid data loss, Python converts smaller data types to higher data types. In the below example, the integer `7` is type casted to a `float` when added with `2.2`. Since the expression represents the sum of two `float` values, the data type of `y` is also `float`.
```

Reviewer 4: Sorry to butt in on someone else's work here, but I believe the past tense of "cast" is "cast" — as with "broadcast" or when talking about an actor having been "cast" in a play or movie, for example. Therefore I think this should read:

>the integer `7` is type cast to a `float` when added with `2.2`.

```py

> y = 7 + 2.2 # Python automatically type casts y into float

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
y = 7 + 2.2 
# Python automatically type casts y into float
```

> print(y)
> print(type(y))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
print(y) 
# Output: 9.2

print(type(y))
# Output: <class 'float'>
```

If you accept these recommended changes, I also (highly) recommend deleting the content in lines 31-36 altogether.

## Explicit Type Conversion

> In explicit type casting, the user converts the data type of a variable using a predefined function. This function is typically the constructor of another data type.

Reviewer: Wanting to confirm, are we speaking about conversion constructors in this second sentence? Would you mind linking me to your source? Thanks in advance! ☺️

> In explicit type casting, the user converts the data type of a variable using a predefined function. This function is typically the constructor of another data type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Explicit type casting involves Python's predefined functions, which act as a constructor of another data type:
```

For

> - `str()`: This function takes an integer or float as an argument and converts it to a string.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `str()` function takes an integer or float as an argument and converts it to a string.
```

> - `str()`: This function takes an integer or float as an argument and converts it to a string.
> - `int()`: This function takes string or float as an argument converts it to an integer.
> - `float()`: This function takes integer or string as an argument and converts it to a float.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `str()` function takes an integer or float as an argument and converts it to a string.
- The [`int()` function](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/python/built-in-functions/int) takes a string or float as an argument converts it to an integer.
- The [`float()` function](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/python/built-in-functions/float) takes an integer or string as an argument and converts it to a float.
```

> ### Type Casting `int` to `str`

Reviewer 2: Given I recently filed [a related issue (#486) about the `str()` function](https://github.com/Codecademy/docs/issues/486), I suggest omitting lines 46-114. Perhaps after this PR is merged, you would be interested in being assigned to write the term entry for the `str()` Python function? @kaifee-haque

Reviewer: omitted those lines as suggested! @Dusch4593 @kaifee-haque

<class 'int'>
```

> Note that `x` must be the string representation of an integer for casting to work. In the above example, `x` is a string that contains a number. So there's no error during type casting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above example, `x` must be the string representation of an integer for casting to work. `x` is a string that contains a number so there's no error when type casting.
```

ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 10: 'seven'
```

## Operations on Different Types of Data

> When operating on data, it is important to keep their type in mind. The following code is a flawed attempt to print the square of a number specified by the user. Try running it and ponder the result.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When operating on data, it is important to keep their data type in mind. The following code is a flawed attempt to print the square of a number specified by the user. Try running it and ponder the result.
```

> When operating on data, it is important to keep their type in mind. The following codebyte is a flawed attempt to print the square of a number specified by the user. Try running it and ponder the result.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When operating on data, it is important to keep their type in mind. The following code is a flawed attempt to print the square of a number specified by the user. Try running it and ponder the result.
```

> When operating on data, it is important to keep their data type in mind. The following code is a flawed attempt to print the square of a number specified by the user. Try running it and ponder the result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When operating on data, it is important to be mindful of the data types associated with it. The following code is a flawed attempt to print the square of a number specified by the user. When run, a `TypeError` will be returned:
```

```codebyte/py
num = input("Please enter a number: ")
print(num ** 2)
```

> The `input()` function takes input from the user and stores it in a variable as a string. However, the `**` operator takes two numbers and returns the first number to the power of the second. In order to make the code work, the input variable must be cast to a number type. Try to edit the code above to successfully square a number inputted by the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [`input()` function](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/python/built-in-functions/input) takes input from the user and stores it in a variable as a string. However, the `**` operator takes two numbers and returns the first number to the power of the second. In order to make the code work, the input variable must be cast to a number type. Try to edit the code above to successfully square a number inputted by the user.
```

> The `input()` function takes input from the user and stores it in a variable as a string. However, the `**` operator takes two numbers and returns the first number to the power of the second. In order to make the code work, the input variable must be cast to a number type. Try to edit the above Codebyte to successfully square a number inputted by the user.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `input()` function takes input from the user and stores it in a variable as a string. However, the `**` operator takes two numbers and returns the first number to the power of the second. In order to make the code work, the input variable must be cast to a number type. Try to edit the above code to successfully square a number inputted by the user.
```

> The `input()` function takes input from the user and stores it in a variable as a string. However, the `**` operator takes two numbers and returns the first number to the power of the second. In order to make the code work, the input variable must be cast to a number type. Try to edit the above Codebyte to successfully square a number inputted by the user.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `input()` function takes input from the user and stores it in a variable as a string. However, the `**` operator takes two numbers and returns the first number to the power of the second. In order to make the code work, the input variable must be cast to a number type. Try to edit the code above to successfully square a number inputted by the user.
```

ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 10: 'seven'
```

## Operations on Different Types of Data

> When operating on data, it is important to keep their type in mind. The following Codebyte is a flawed attempt to print the square of a number specified by the user. Try running it and ponder the result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When operating on data, it is important to keep their type in mind. The following codebyte is a flawed attempt to print the square of a number specified by the user. Try running it and ponder the result.
```

Reviewer: I don't believe we want to place flawed codebytes in Docs. @sonnynomnom can this be confirmed?

Rather, we can condense all the deleted code snippets and add a more complex example in there as well.

```codebyte/py
num = input("Please enter a number: ")
print(num ** 2)
```

> What happened? The `input()` function takes input from the user and stores it in a variable as a string. However, the `**` operator takes two numbers and returns the first number to the power of the second. In order to make the code work, the input variable must be cast to a number type. Try to edit the above Codebyte to successfully square a number inputted by the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `input()` function takes input from the user and stores it in a variable as a string. However, the `**` operator takes two numbers and returns the first number to the power of the second. In order to make the code work, the input variable must be cast to a number type. Try to edit the above Codebyte to successfully square a number inputted by the user.
```
